---
title: §1.2 White dwarves and novae
permalink: /1.2/
layout: default
---

§1.2 White dwarves and novae
============================

<blockquote>
<p>White dwarf matter is so highly compressed that a bowling ball filled with
	the stuff would tip the scales at over a thousand tons–about the weight of
	a small ocean liner.
</p>
<footer><cite>- Laurence A. Marschall 
	<a href="../bibliography/#marschall">[Marschall 1988]</a></cite></footer>
</blockquote>

In normal stars, the relationship between pressure, density and temperature is
well-described by the ideal gas law [[Rolfs and Rodney
1988]](../bibliography/#rolfs). This relationship holds as long as nuclear
fuel remains to provide heat and energy. Once the fuel runs out, however, the
star no longer is able to support itself, and its material then collapses.

Chandrasekhar showed that if the remaining mass is less than 1.4 solar masses,
the object may be supported from further collapse by electrons behaving as a
Fermi gas [[Chandrasekhar 1939]](../bibliography/#chandrasekhar). The
electrons in a star are the most numerous particles, especially in a white
dwarf. White dwarves are primarily ashes from the later stages of nuclear
burning, such as carbon, oxygen, neon and magnesium.

As fermions, electrons are governed by the Pauli exclusion principle, which
says that no two identical fermions may inhabit the same quantum state. In a
white dwarf, the electrons have filled up all available quantum states up to
the Fermi energy. A solar mass white dwarf has a radius of approximately 8000
km (only slightly higher than the earth), making these objects very dense
(~10<sup>6</sup> g⋅cm<sup>-3</sup>) [[Rolfs and Rodney
1988]](../bibliography/#rolfs).

When it is in a close binary system with an actively burning star, the dwarf's
strong gravitational field will gradually pull material onto its surface from
the less dense star. The falling matter also heats up the surface with the
kinetic energy it gains. A normal star would expand as it heats up, lowering
the density. The degeneracy (i.e.,
<span class="equation">T∕T<sub>F</sub>≪1</span>) of the white dwarf [[Pathria
1996]](../bibliography/#pathria) prevents this, however. Thermonuclear runaway
may occur if the temperature dependence of nuclear energy generation exceeds
the temperature dependence of energy loss through cooling [[Weischer Görres et
al. 1999]](../bibliography/#weischer).

<table class="equation">
	<tr>
		<td>
			<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block">
			 <semantics>
			  <mrow>
			   <mfrac>
			    <mrow>
			     <mi>d</mi>
			     <mover accent="true">
			      <mi>ε</mi>
			      <mo stretchy="false">˙</mo>
			     </mover>
			    </mrow>
			    <mi mathvariant="italic">dT</mi>
			   </mfrac>
			   <mo stretchy="false">&gt;</mo>
			   <mrow>
			    <mo fence="true" stretchy="true">|</mo>
			    <mrow>
			     <mfrac>
			      <mrow>
			       <mi>d</mi>
			       <msub>
			        <mover accent="true">
			         <mi>ε</mi>
			         <mo stretchy="false">˙</mo>
			        </mover>
			        <mi mathvariant="italic">cool</mi>
			       </msub>
			      </mrow>
			      <mi mathvariant="italic">dT</mi>
			     </mfrac>
			    </mrow>
			    <mo fence="true" stretchy="true">|</mo>
			   </mrow>
			  </mrow>
			  <annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0">{d{dot ε}} over {dT} &gt; left lline {d{dot ε}_{cool}} over {dT} right rline</annotation>
			 </semantics>
			</math>
		</td>
		<a name="eqn1.2"><th rowspan="2">(1.6)</th></a>
	</tr>
</table>

Periodically, the heating will bring the surface material to a sufficient
temperature for explosive nuclear burning to occur, that is, condition (1.6)
is satisfied. (If the mass accretion is fast enough, such as with a red giant
partner, the explosion may be violent enough to completely disperse the dwarf.
These events are know as Type Ia supernovae [[Rolfs and Rodney
1988]](../bibliography/#rolfs).)

The burning layers generate energy at such a large rate that they expand
rapidly, i.e., the surface layers are not degenerate like the bulk of the
white dwarf. The burning continues as long <span class="correction">as</span>
the expansion hasn't reduced the temperature and density too far. The peak of
visible light observed by astronomers actually occurs during this expansion
and cooling phase, because the luminosity of a radiating object is
proportional to its surface area. Of particular interest in this study is the
gamma-ray flux potentially observable from such objects.

<table class="data">
  <caption>Table 1: Radioisotopes thought to be capable of generating
  	astronomically observable γ-rays in nova explosions.</caption>
  <tr>
  	<th>Radioisotope</th>
  	<th>γ-ray energy (keV)</th>
  	<th>Lifetime</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  	<td><sup>18</sup>F</td>
  	<td>511</td>
  	<td>158 min</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  	<td><sup>22</sup>Na</td>
  	<td>1275</td>
  	<td>3.75 yr</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  	<td><sup>26</sup>Al</td>
  	<td>1809</td>
  	<td>1.04 Myr</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Table 1 shows the proton-rich radioactive nuclei that may contribute
significantly to observable γ-rays from novae [[Hernanz, José et al.
1999]](../bibliography/#hernanz). Any left over nuclei on the proton rich side
of the valley of β-stability may be sources of 511-keV γ-radiation, but
<sup>18</sup>F and <sup>22</sup>Na are thought to dominate the 511-keV flux.
The waiting point nucleus, <sup>13</sup>N, has a lifetime so short that it has
mostly decayed before the expanding matter becomes transparent to γ-rays. The
<sup>22</sup>Na is present only in oxygen-neon novae and its long lifetime
relative to <sup>18</sup>F makes its 511-keV emission weaker; however,
<span class="correction">its</span> daughter, <sup>22</sup>Ne, emits a unique
1275-keV γ-ray which may eventually be observable [[Clayton and Hoyle
1974]](../bibliography/#clayton). <sup>18</sup>F, which decays directly to the
ground state of <sup>18</sup>O, has a <span class="correction">2.6-hour</span>
lifetime, allowing it to be strongly observable if it is produced in
sufficient quantities. The effect of <sup>18</sup>F+p resonances in
<sup>19</sup>Ne on <sup>18</sup>F production in novae is one of the subjects
of this thesis.