---
title: Acknowledgements
permalink: /acknowledgements/
layout: default
---

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank many people, without whom this work would have been much
more difficult. At the top of the list, of course, is Peter Parker. I cannot
imagine having a more supportive or effective mentor. Beyond his extensive
knowledge of the field, Peter's great strength as an advisor is his ability to
accomodate the different working styles of those he supervises. I believe this
is something that cannot be taught.

I am very grateful to the succession of post-doctoral researchers who have
worked in our research group for all of their help and guidance. Ken Swartz
eased my transition into the life of a graduate researcher. The focal plane
detector works today largely because of his efforts. By creating Jam, he gave
me the chance to feed the code-hacker monkey that lives on my back and do
important work for our research at the same time. After he left to work in
industry, he allowed me to appreciate what our west coast has to offer by
hosting a couple of my vacations. William Bradfield-Handler arrived at Yale
with a freshly minted Ph.D. from the U.K. He proceeded to kick-start the
"coincidence project" and organized all the major hardware purchasing and
design. He also made certain that we all had fun while we were doing our work.
It is because of him that I learned how to get properly drunk and party all
night (well, most of it, anyway) in Edinburgh. Jac Caggiano was Will's
successor, and was no less valuable in making sure that my experiment was
pulled off succsessfully. He has definitely taught me patience in the face of
electronics debugging, and also the importance of using appropriate tools for
data analysis. I'll miss his ability to produce an appropriate quote from "The
Simpsons" for any situation.

_There are still four more paragraphs to type in this section._